(calm music)
There are no shortages of interpretations
of the Bible out there.
But Rocco Errico says it's wise to look
at the original language of the New Testament
to understand the teachings
of the prophet known as Jesus.
Known as an Aramic Scholar,
Rocco has a very different take
on what the teachings were about.
The central message, he says,
is about each man embodying the god within
and living in unity and peace.
Rocco, you're such an interesting person.
I love your work.
I love listening to the passion
in which you relay your message.
You're a unique person because you've
actually delved deep into Aramaic
to get to the bottom of the original
teachings of Jesus, of which, you are a follower.
However, your work is extremely controversial
among the Christian community.
Very controversial.
Not only because I represent the Aramaic language,
which was the language of Jesus Christ,
the language of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
most people think they spoke Hebrew,
but they didn't, they spoke Aramaic.
Scriptures tell you themselves
that Abraham was an Aramean.
Yes.
Either way you want to say it.
So, he spoke Aramaic.
Later on, from Aramaic,
the dialect developed, which became Hebrew.
So the roots of Hebrew and Arabic,
the roots of it,
is the Aramaic language.
That's before the road forked.
Let's get back to your own life.
What propelled you into studying this,
very deeply esoteric language
and becoming quite a scholar to the point
where many people refer to your work?
The reason for that is,
I was always interested in Scripture.
From when I was little,
I was always fascinated.
I come really from an Italian family.
Oh, you'd suppose with a name
like Rocco Ericco...
Ericco is really the way...
Ericco. And beautiful olive skin.
No one ever says it that way.
Everyone says Ericco,
which is the Anglical way of saying it.
What happened is,
my grandfather used to tell me Bible stories.
I did not know, at the time, when I was little,
that my grandfather didn't know how
to read and write.
Not even Italian.
It was my grandmother who knew
how to read and write.
She always read the Bible.
She read it to my grandfather.
Then he would always relate the stories to me.
They always fascinated me,
and I was always interested in Scripture.
Although I was brought up Roman Catholic,
and I had also studied with the priest, afterwards,
to become a priest.
But then it changed.
Which is another story which I won't go into.
But it changed.
Then I got involved in Protestantism,
and I was on the fundamental side of it.
The fundamental side of it,
after being in it for about a couple of years,
felt too narrow to me.
There's something wrong with this.
I couldn't put my finger on it,
so I kept studying all kinds of books,
all kinds of reading.
Of course, I also went to school,
Bible school and all that whole thing.
I still wasn't getting satisfied.
Then I finally was pastoring some churches
in San Antonio, Texas,
and I was the Associate Pastor of a nice congregation
in San Antonio,
and that's where I did most of my research work.
I happened to, which is another story,
come upon these people who had heard
Dr. George M. Lamsa,
who was from the Near East,
and he translated the entire Bible
from Aramaic into English.
HarperCollins publishes that Bible in English.
What is it called?
It's called the Lamsa Translation.
L-A-M-S-A Translation.
But he was fought tooth and toenail
when he first did the four Gospels from Aramaic,
because he claimed that Aramaic
is the original of the New Testament, not Greek.
This brought the scholarship down on him.
All the scholars came down on him.
Because we all teach, here in the West,
that Greek is the original of the New Testament,
not Aramaic.
So that brought a lot of controversy.
But I began to read it and study it.
I thought, well, I know Jesus spoke Aramaic.
Why wouldn't his teachings be put in Aramaic?
Why should it be put in Greek first?
The Greeks did adopt Jesus' teachings later.
In fact, helped pollute his teachings.
There's been a lot of pollution
on a lot of fronts there.
Right, so this was it.
This was what he faced.
I got ahold of that, and I thought,
this is what I have been waiting for.
I got his book, My Neighbor Jesus,
because he was Assyrian,
and his native tongue was Aramaic.
So this is the first time we have a translator
translating directly from his own native language.
Yes.
Not only that,
he was from Northern Iraq.
Now we're talking about in the
late 1800s, where they were isolated,
they were groups of Christians
on like a little island,
but there's no island there,
but I'm just using it as a metaphor,
in a sea of Muslim people
was this Christian.
They were descendants of the ancient Assyrians
and they were followers of Jesus.
So when he came here to the states,
he didn't know all this stuff
that we were talking about Jesus.
So he began to write about it,
that Jesus wasn't forsaken on the cross,
and all these different things
that we teach here in the West.
When I got ahold of that,
I thought this is what I've been waiting for
with the Scriptures.
So much stuff didn't make sense
when I read the Scriptures.
I thought, why is there so much contradiction.
They keep coming out with one translation
after another, after another, after another,
to try and improve it.
But they still make it worse.
Let me ask you a question at this point.
When you take this, and this isn't...
it may sound like, it's not a touchy feely question,
in your heart, were things just not resolving
properly with all this information?
Absolutely.
That I was getting in my other training.
I thought, I'm not happy.
Something is not right with it.
It was in my heart that I felt this.
But I couldn't put my finger on it.
I thought, how could,
as people were teaching,
that God is a wrathful God,
and then Jesus softened God's heart
through his sacrifice on the cross.
I thought, but how could God kill his son
and then forgive me?
What kind of a god is that?
Yeah, I had some issues
when I was young too on all of this.
Yet, the Scriptures seemed to read that way.
I thought, there's something not right.
That's what got me on my adventure going forward.
Of course, I studied other religions, too,
Buddhism, Islam, all of it, I went into all of it.
Although I never told my congregation
that I was doing that.
Right.
But once I got ahold of the Lamsa Bible,
I was using it from the pulpit
and not telling them what translation
I was reading from.
Interesting.
In the English.
They all wanted it.
They said, "Oh, that's fascinating.
"That's so clear.
"It's so much clearer than the King James
"and all these other English versions we had".
They said, "What are you reading from?"
I said, "English translation from Aramaic,
"done by a native."
That's what got me started in the work.
Then I opened up classes all over the State of Texas
and I started with, maybe 11 people,
and I always ended up with two or three hundred.
Then I wrote Dr. Lamsa,
and he came to me in 1965,
and that began our friendship together
and working together.
We worked together 10 years.
You took this on 100%?
You speak Aramaic, you can more or less
translate and speak.
I read and write Aramaic.
Read and write Aramaic, yes.
I don't use it as a spoken language.
Unless you do, it dies.
But I can read and write it.
I use the New Testament in Aramaic,
and I use his translation too, in English.
But I also have the Aramaic texts
that I read from.
When you look at the translations
that I've seen in some of your work,
even starting with the most basic, the Lord's prayer
for example, it doesn't look a whole lot like
the Lord's prayer that we said
in our Lutheran Sunday School in church every week.
One of the basic difference is,
in the prayer, where we say,
and do not lead us into temptation,
can you imagine God leading you into temptation?
Scholars still, in Greek, have this problem.
They say, don't bring this to the test.
There is so many different translations
of that one verse in the Lord's prayer
that they can't straighten it out.
The only one way they can straighten it out
is through Aramaic.
And it's (speaking in foreign language),
which means, and do not let us
enter into temptation.
The word is (speaks in foreign language)
and it's a reflexive verb,
do not let us enter into temptation,
not don't lead me into temptation.
It sounds like these might be subtle differences.
They're not.
There's nothing subtle about these differences at all.
The entire tone is something that is much more
gracious and loving and supportive
when you read the Aramaic translation of the Lord's prayer.
Yes, and every place in the Bible where it says
God's a jealous God,
Aramaic says zealous.
Now the Hebrew Bible is now no longer using jealous.
They're using the word impassioned.
Zealous, amazing what the difference
one letter will make.
(laughter)
Let's go into some of what you were teaching
that was not necessarily accepted
throughout the Christian community
and some of the really common perceptions
of Christianity, across the board.
I was listening to you lecture
on a few of them the other day,
one of the things you talked about is
a lot of Jesus' work actually was inspired by
or taken forward from John the Baptist,
who was a very, kind of a radical,
the original conspiracy theorist on a certain level.
He was a fiery prophet,
he was like Elijah and Elisha,
the Old Testament prophets.
He was the last of that kind of prophet.
Yeah.
The fiery kind.
He believed that the Kingdom of Heaven,
what we call the Kingdom of God,
was coming, but in it it had wrath.
Uh oh, and it's coming after us.
(laughter)
Because of the injustice,
you have to understand why it refers to wrath,
because of the injustices that human beings
do to each other.
Right.
And assuming that there has to be something
meated out for that.
The ancient understanding of God is
you meet evil with evil.
You see that?
You'll find that throughout the entire Old Testament.
Like Noah and the flood.
If you read about the flood in the Old Testament,
how did God solve...
It says he was sorry he made man.
God never was sorry he made man.
This is a scribal notation that was
put into the Scripture, because of the flood that came.
Well, God brought it, because they attributed
everything to God in the Old Testament, everything.
If you stubbed your toe, God did it.
If someone died in the family, God took them.
Very victim oriented.
Because that's the only concept they had.
You gotta realize, people don't realize,
the Scriptures is a story
of ascending consciousness.
It's transcending each stage, you see?
It's human development.
Their understanding of God is in
a constant transcendent state.
So they believed they had no devil.
They didn't have any devil to blame.
Their god, they believed, was in control.
So anything that happened
was always attributed to God.
If we look at this and consider the times,
coming out of Egypt, which a lot of the people
in this region did come out of Egypt
in the ancient traditions, in which there were
many gods at that time as well.
You had a god over your affairs of food and kitchen,
a god over birth, a god over so forth,
so the cultures were very steeped already
in attributing all actions to a god of some kind.
Right, even the animals.
Right, right.
But with this case,
no image could be made of God,
which is in the three monotheistic religions
of Judaism, Christianity, the ancient Christianity,
and Islam.
Which is true, absolutely true.
No images should be made,
because God was spirit.
Not an image.
You cannot make an image of God
as a human being, or as an animal,
or as plants, or as trees,
these are all the creations
that come out of God.
But God is none of those things.
It comes out of the mindset
of the time, of course,
highly patriarchal the last few thousand years, for example,
so of course it's going to be a man with a white beard
in the sky with a staff, and so forth.
We invented that.
Of course.
They didn't invent that in the Near East.
But still, even today, when you think of God,
it's still automatically,
it pours out of our mouths out of habit,
this is a he.
We don't look at it as gender neutral,
we don't look at it as possibly being feminine,
we only see it as a he and this has had a big stamp
on the lives of all of the cultures
that have come out of that time,
right up to this very day.
Because this is grammar.
But we made it something else.
As I tried to explain when I did the Lord's prayer,
is the term Father,
because when I even wrote my book
on the ancient Aramaic prayer of Jesus,
and then later on changed its name to
Setting a Trap for God...
I don't know why, but I forgot to put in there
the meaning of the term Father.
Which is?
Which I'm gonna get to in a minute.
Because I started getting irate letters
here in the West, from feminists.
Blaming me.
I said, well, number one, I would always
respond to the letters, I don't care how irate they were,
and I would tell them,
please don't blame me for calling God Father.
I said, Jesus is the one who originated this term,
calling God Father, and the Jewish people
and some of the Psalms
refer to God as Father too.
But Jesus really built on that.
I said, first of all, it's not my term,
and I'm working with the Scriptures,
so I have to use those terms, Father.
But there is something more to consider,
that most people don't,
and I didn't put it in my book.
In my next addition of the book,
I'm going to be putting it in there.
It is in my German,
and in the Italian.
The Italian edition, and the German edition
that's published in Germany and in Italy,
it is in there.
Okay.
What I'm gonna tell you now.
The word Father is a term of endearment.
Oh.
It wasn't trying to categorize God.
Genderize, yeah.
Genderize, right.
Like we use the term, honey, sweetheart,
darling, precious.
It's not gender specific, is it?
Interesting, because if you go then over
into the Sufism in Rumi,
he always called it beloved.
Well, that's what I'm gonna get to.
The term father meant beloved.
The term mother means beloved.
It had nothing to do with which gender.
It was a way of calling God the beloved,
and Jesus preferred that.
Because they don't like to use the term God.
Even today, among the Jewish people,
they don't use the term God.
They refer to him as Hashem,
the name.
But father was a term of endearment.
Let me tell you something,
that's even prevalent today in Arabic.
It's still prevalent by Aramaic speaking people today
that come from the Near East,
not born here in the West,
but born in the Near East and have come here.
A mother and a father will call
their son or daughter Father.
Beloved.
Two sisters will call each other Father.
That's very clarifying.
Not only that.
Two friends, if they're close,
they have to be close friends,
will call each other Father.
That's very interesting.
We wouldn't do that in the West, not friendship.
No, no, we have a specific image
of what that word means.
But this is beloved,
it's a term of endearment.
When you say, "Our Father, who is in heaven",
and the reason heaven is used
is the heavenly father, the heavenly beloved.
So you don't confuse it with an earthly father,
meaning beloved.
But you could say mother and meaning beloved.
A mother will also call her son mother in Arabic.
I've heard...
I was called, for instance,
when Dr. Lamsa's niece, my mentor's niece
called me after he passed away,
because I did the interment and all that,
and when she'd call me all the time,
or I'd call her,
first thing she would call me is,
oh father, I'm so glad you called.
I'm not her father.
She was older than I was too.
But she always called me Father.
Which means beloved.
Or like we would say,
it's a close sense of friendship.
What Jesus was creating by using this term,
in the Near Eastern setting,
among Semites, it meant someone that is precious,
dear to you, dear to you.
So when we're saying our father who is in heaven,
we're saying, oh, dear one,
oh, beloved, oh, honey.
I'm glad we clarified that.
Because it's something I've wondered about,
how that was being perpetuated,
so that was very helpful, I think
for probably just about everybody listening,
unless they are also Aramaic scholars.
Let's talk about some of the...
Aramaic scholars don't know it,
because what makes this extra is
I am familiar with an Ancient Near Eastern culture.
Dr. Lamsa came from the most ancient
practices in the Near East.
The Assyrians, yes.
So I learned those ancient,
which are dying in the Near East today.
A lot of these things I'm saying,
except for the term Father,
is dying in the Near East because of the advent
of the Western world in the Near East.
There's big changes that are occurring,
and a lot of scholars don't study it,
they study it from a book learning.
I got it out of a living patriarch.
Which makes a big difference.
Not that the scholarly work
in the language isn't good, it is.
But unless you come from the Near East,
they don't teach this.
I know several Roman Catholic Aramaic scholars,
when I was in Ireland, and they put me
on the talk show,
and they were coming from Aramaic.
They had a Roman Catholic,
who was considered number one
as an Aramaic scholar, but they said,
how come he didn't say the things you're saying?
I said, well what can I tell you,
he just didn't have the tutoring that I had.
I was tutored by someone from the Near East,
whose native tongue was Aramaic,
and whose culture and way of thinking
and acting and psychology and all that
was the same as the ancient world.
This is a really important factor here,
because we're running all this information
in the King James Version of the Bible,
and all these interpretations
through our western mind.
In fact, these were translated
through a western mind.
To go back to the original intention,
you almost have to have the advantage
of the kind of relationship that you had
with your mentor to be able to grok this.
Now let's start pulling out some of the
common misperceptions, the most obvious
popular, what you would say are misperceptions,
that Christians today hold dear to them
and will not relinquish.
First of all, there's three things
we have mistaken ideas about
that we use Scriptures on.
Okay.
We have a mistaken idea about God,
and what God is.
We have mistaken ideas about Jesus
and his teachings.
And we have a misunderstanding
of what humanity is.
Those three things are very vital and important.
Yeah, I would say.
Let's start talking about,
we talked a little bit about
just the terminology in misperception of God,
but let's talk about the misperception of God
in an encapsulated way.
First of all, what we misunderstand
is Jesus didn't change God into something else.
We have to realize that all the perceptions of God
mostly that we read in the Old Testaments
are a mixed bag.
What I mean by a mixed bag is
some saw God as wrathful,
some saw God as loving,
some saw God as just chastising the people
to bring them around,
and Jesus did not accept any of those
concepts about God.
This is why he used the term beloved.
Jesus did not believe in using evil to fight evil.
Right.
You're talking about a revolutionary, really.
This is why Rome hated the early
movement under Jesus.
Because they believed in might and force,
which they were conquering the world,
the Romans were.
His teachings were contrary to force.
Now Quakers and Mennonites
go to an extreme.
I mean, they keep themselves...
They make it more of a how you dress,
how you live,
and against the modern world.
But that's not what Jesus was talking about.
He was talking about the inner sense of self,
not the outer sense of self.
It doesn't make a difference whether
you have long hair or short hair.
Religion took up all these things,
how you dress,
how all of this thing is to be concerned.
No, Jesus was concerned with the inward.
In the Scriptures, known to be very,
not just tolerant, but very accepting of all,
all people.
Exactly.
Again, here is another concept,
when Jesus sent his disciples out,
and he teaching was, he tells them,
now be perfect, even as your father in heaven is perfect.
Again, it's translation.
By using the word perfect,
and it's not a bad translation
to use the word perfect there,
but when I use the word perfect in English,
I have a different understanding of perfect
than they did when that word was used.
That word in Aramaic is gmeera,
G-M-E-E-R-A,
I always add an H for the ah sound,
but there is no H there, just gmeera.
What that means is, to be inclusive.
Big difference.
This of course is, be inclusive,
even as your father in heaven is inclusive.
The reason why we know it has that shade of meaning,
because it means maturity,
it also means someone who is a jack of all trades,
these are the different meanings to the word.
How do we know it meant to be inclusive
is because he just got through saying
that God lets his rain fall on the just and the unjust
and lets his sun shine on the good and the wicked.
Meaning God is not partial.
Whereas you read partiality
when you read the Old Testament.
It's as if God chose a special people
and that's it, no one else.
This is the problem.
People misunderstand that.
Which, we'll get into the chosen in a minute,
but let me get to this.
Jesus taught he wanted his disciples
to be open to everyone, be inclusive.
But first you're to go to the Jewish people
and the lost sheep of the house of Israel.
Because they were ready for it,
they were open for it.
Romans and Greeks, they didn't care about it.
But the other Semites, you had Arabs
that were in existence then,
you had Assyrians that were in existence,
you had Syrians that were in existence,
they weren't called Syrians,
they were called Arameans.
But historically, these were
all among the Semites?
These were all Semites.
He had to go to them first.
I mean, what did the Romans
and Greeks care about Moses or any,
they didn't care about that.
That's true.
They were on power campaigns at the time.
Yet, Paul writes to the Jew first,
and then the Greek.
That's impossible.
The Greek wasn't considered at all.
That's a mistranslation.
Aramaic texts doesn't say, to the Jew first,
and then the Greeks,
it says, to the Jews first and the Arameans,
which meant the Syrian people,
the other Semite groups.
Because it's of the same culture.
Roman culture, Greek culture
was totally alien, as our culture is today
to Islam in the Near East and their culture.
They clash.
Because of the way we're in another clash,
like they did during the time of Jesus.
We're in this clash,
and this is what's creating this problem.
But it was cultural.
So it should be to the Arameans,
not the Greeks,
because they would understand Semitic language,
they would understand the culture.
The only difference between Jews and Syrians
was the religion, not the culture.
Let's talk about that.
What happened there?
What happened in the split,
in terms of the religion,
the religious practices at that time?
Once the Greeks did take up
with the teachings of Jesus, and all that,
then a lot of Greek teachings came into it,
and it polluted everything.
It corrupted Jesus' teaching.
It became something else.
We developed a priesthood.
That's what Jesus...
He wasn't down with priesthood.
He was just a common people,
He wasn't down with churches.
He was a common man himself.
When the second century came on,
Jesus became God.
Well now where does that put us?
We're supposed to imitate him?
We're talking about God,
how can you imitate God?
Except mercy, the only way the Jewish people
talk about imitating God, what they meant by that
is mercy, compassion, love, understanding,
enlightenment, that's what they mean.
But when we use it,
when Jesus said, the works that I do,
you do also,
well how can we?
We weren't born like he was born.
We took a mother and a father,
and he didn't have one.
Right, exactly.
He'd be like a duck telling a bunch of chickens
on how to swim, and a smart chicken
would say to the duck that was teaching him,
why don't you give us your webbed feet,
and then we can learn how to swim.
Because we were born without webbed feet
like you got in order to do the swimming.
Yeah, and all the separation starts occurring.
These are the doctrines that have muddied
and darkened the teachings of Jesus,
and we miss the major point.
He came bringing a major shift into this world.
A paradigm shift, as you call it.
A paradigm shift.
Tell us what a shift was to shift away from into.
From violence to love.
From violence to meekness.
From hatred to love.
This is the shift.
So how do we make the shift?
That's what he came to do.
To teach us how to make this shift.
Instead, it turned into, what do you believe?
Do you believe in three gods or one God?
Do you believe in three in one,
or none, or what?
We've lost the whole issue.
The whole notion of inclusiveness,
then you get into exclusiveness,
and we're talking, you mentioned this
a little bit ago, about the chosen people at the time,
that were chosen to seed a message
among the Semitic people of the day,
but that's been carried forward
into a totally different way.
Absolutely.
The word chosen has become misunderstood today.
How I always use to say,
when you look at chosen people,
I use an illustration of water, running water.
Like, why did God choose Abraham above everyone else?
Why would he become so chosen?
As if God sat there and thought a while,
and said, that's a good one,
I think I'll take this one.
You're making God a human being,
and God is not a human being,
in that sense.
It's like water,
fast, running water.
If you get an obstacle,
put it in the way of running water,
what will the water do?
It moves around.
It move around it, right?
But if there is an opening in this obstacle,
where it can go through,
the water would run through, right?
What happened is,
Abraham was open.
The water ran through.
When it comes out the other side,
it's chosen.
You understand what I'm saying?
Because he was open,
when it comes through,
he's chosen.
That's not necessarily a birthright
from that point forward, however.
That was of the moment.
That was at the moment.
That's why people missed the Abrahamic blessing.
The Abrahamic blessing was
I chose you because I favor you,
no, no, no, no.
I chose you, that through your family,
through your descendants,
all the families of the earth shall be blessed.
Now that's quite a different interpretation.
That's right there in the Scriptures.
Okay.
So there's that.
But we don't pay attention to that.
No, we don't pay attention to that.
It's a very interesting, distinguishing remark
that you made there.
Now let's talk about the whole notion of sin.
Again, we're talking about exclusiveness.
You're a sinner, you're not a sinner
because you do some things,
maybe because you kiss your boyfriend
or have sex before you're married,
or whatever it is throughout history,
that have made people go into great shame about themselves,
these were not part
of the teachings of Jesus at that time,
as being accepting of all, was it?
First of all, you've you've gotta keep Jesus
in his original setting.
Right.
In the Near Eastern setting, that's true.
In the Near Eastern setting,
with the Semitic culture, and with the Jewish teachings,
because definitely, even though he was revolutionary,
his religion was definitely of the Jewish faith.
Right, so he was living within that.
Okay.
He was living within that matrix.
That's why, certain things, he never got into.
But if someone had
committed a sexual act,
and of course, they would become pregnant,
he forgave them.
Yeah.
Which, under the Mosaic law,
she should've been stoned to death,
and whoever had slept with her
should have been stoned to death.
A little harsh.
But he's saying no.
When he sat down and he drew,
or made geometric figures,
it was the temple floor,
there was no way you could make...
He was contemplating.
That's what they do in the Near East.
Today they use those worry beads,
but in the ancient world,
they would just do this.
Like when you're on the phone
and you're doodling,
he was doodling.
Because he was thinking.
Because they had faced him with a problem.
What do you do about this woman?
Because the culture and the religion says
she needs to be stoned to death.
Of course, they didn't bring the guy who slept with her,
but they brought her.
(laughter)
Still happens today, yeah.
Jesus thought about it,
and then he came to a conclusion,
and he says, he that is without sin,
let him throw the first stone.
Meaning that some of these men
had slept with that woman.
Not what Cecil B. DeMille did,
and said the murderer, thief,
none of that.
In other words, these men were guilty
and of course, the Scriptures are exaggerated,
like there was a whole crowd that brought her,
but probably three of four men
who hated what Jesus had to say.
What they did then is,
when he said, he who is without sin
let him throw the first stone,
they all left.
It was up to him as a prophet,
and as a follower of the religion of the Mosaic faith,
he said, woman where are your accusers?
She says, they are gone, my Lord.
He says, now go,
and don't do it again.
Don't put me in this situation again.
Don't do it for yourself.
So she wouldn't be dragged off and stoned.
Absolutely, he was for her, but he forgave her.
You're talking about a peacemaker.
Essentially, everything, it was inclusiveness...
He brought everything into harmony,
he brought life to that woman.
She should've been stoned to death,
according to the religious dictates,
but he brought salvation to her.
That's salvation.
Not what we think of salvation today.
But that was salvation to her.
Then he warned her,
for her sake, don't do it again.
Don't sin again means, don't put yourself
in that position where you're gonna be
thrown into it.
They'll drag you off, and you'll have
to find something else.
Of course, scholars say that story is made up.
Well, well, whether it's made up or not,
it has the same meaning.
Yes.
I'm talking about
what our modern scholars here in the States
and Europe have done,
is they're completely making everything
in the Bible not true.
Which is a shame.
Some of it, yes, has been added by scribes.
But they're throwing everything out.
For a while, they didn't believe Jesus existed.
Now they say, oh yes, now he existed.
What they're gonna do is destroy
one of the greatest teachings
and teacher, worst than the crucifixion,
by putting him on the cross.
Because by putting him on the cross,
his words spread more.
When you say, he didn't exist,
his teachings don't mean anything,
this is made up, and that is made up,
you're destroying the whole thing.
The truth is, we're coming into a
period of history, had we embraced...
those teachings of love thy neighbor
as you love thyself,
of including all and not excluding,
and not setting ourselves apart
from each other as one more special than the other,
had we embraced these concepts
and taken them to heart
a couple thousand years ago,
or even today, we'd be a lot further along
in our human evolution.
We would.
That was the whole purpose of it.
Jesus came to move us into a new
stage of consciousness.
Into a new era, bring humankind into a new era.
But all of his teachings got polluted.
His teachings are dangerous
because it's dangerous to make this shift.
Dangerous to whom?
To the one who teaches it and practices it.
Yes.
I'll give you an example,
a modern example.
Leo Tolstoy wrote a book called,
first book his published was in 1884,
do I have time for this?
Yes.
In 1884,
which was what he believed,
and it was published.
It wasn't a novel.
It was what he believed.
It was so revolutionary, the Russian government banned it.
What did he believe?
What was the content?
Wait a minute,
it's the second one that became the controversy.
It did spread into other languages, that book.
The church got after him,
and the state got after him.
So he wrote another book,
as a rebuttal against all this 10 years later.
It was actually 1893, about nine years,
but it never got published in Russian.
It only stayed in manuscript form
because the Russian government
considered his first book as bad and banned.
So the second book,
which was on the teachings of Jesus,
and he called it The Kingdom of God is Within You.
He took all the teachings of Jesus...
Because it's a rebuttal against all the things
he said in the first book.
I have not read the first book.
This was a book of self empowerment?
Empowering the individual.
Exactly, self empowerment.
But based all on Jesus' teaching.
I hear you.
What he did then, was after he did that,
and they wouldn't publish it in Russian,
it went into Germany, got published in German,
but then it got published into English
this was 1894.
Then it got down to South Africa,
and went to this barrister
by the name of Gandhi.
(laughter)
A young barrister?
Right.
When he read it, it was revolutionary to him.
He didnt do anything about it at first.
But when he kept getting pushed,
and shoved back because of his skin color,
even in South Africa because the British were in there.
Because of that,
and he went back to India,
thats when he began to step out,
to enact, to actualize
what Tolstoy wrote in his book.
Tolstoy, himself, was thrilled.
Ghandi had written Tolstoy.
Tolstoy died in 1910.
Tolstoy at least got one letter,
and he wrote one letter back to Gandhi,
and told him that he was glad and what was happening.
But Tolstoy never acted on it himself,
and he felt bad about it,
he even wrote about it.
He says, I feel like such a hypocrite.
Yet at the same time,
in Russia, Carl Marx work was then after this
Carl Marx work was
and thats why he wrote it,
against Carl Marx communism.
But also against the rule of the Czar and the state
because of what they were doing,
The cruelty of governmental officials.
Period.
And sectarianism as a form of worship.
At the church, too.
He had the whole thing in there.
But he used Jesus teachings.
This is why theyre dangerous and subversive.
Because it takes power away from all
the existing dogmas and structures
that have been built around it.
Absolutely.
But Gandhi acted on it.
Of course, he lost his life.
Eventually, I mean, he won.
I call it, he used the weapons of the soul,
love, compassion, understanding, and non resistance.
That was the key, non resistance to evil.
Though the evil comes against you,
dont combat it.
Dont combat it.
Then of course, you know who took that up again
here in the States
was Martin Luther King, Jr.
and he followed a lot of the things there,
but it all stems from Tolstoy
making practical, some of it wasnt too practical,
but he did make practical the teachings of Jesus
which were so revolutionary.
This notion,
you said quite a few minutes ago now,
you talked about this embracing of the meek,
and the meek, this is a big one right now,
because the Western world has been grown on
and fed on the notion of competition,
strength, the man that can work the hardest,
make the most money.
Now, the woman that can work the hardest,
rise the cooperate ladder and so forth,
has the power, holds the power,
and only the powerful seem to inherit anything,
it would appear.
Lets talk that phrase.
They inherit all right, they inherit the wind.
Lets talk about the original phrase
in the Aramaic text,
and the meek shall inherit the earth,
what does that mean?
The word meek (speaks in foreign language)
in Aramaic means someone who is pliable, bendable.
Flexible.
Flexible, exactly.
This teaching was not new.
It was in the Hebrew Bible.
But what Jesus did, is he called on the meek.
He was recruiting them for
The open-minded, shall we say?
That could embrace new philosophies and ideas.
Right.
So what does this mean,
the meek shall inherit the earth?
The meek, because they brought peace and peacemakers.
They didnt go to lawyers, they went to peacemakers.
The peacemakers stayed outside the city.
In fact, Ill never forget,
one time I was lecturing in Northern California, in Fremont,
and when I was there lecturing,
I was talking about peacemakers
and there was a woman from Lebanon there
and she stopped me,
she said now hold it a second,
we still have these peacemakers in Lebanon.
Wed rather go to them than to the lawyers.
(laughs)
Well yeah, can we all on them in a larger sense,
right now we need them.
She said, they didnt charge us,
and we gave them what we could.
They brought peace, they settled problems
they did all these different things.
Kind of like a loving mediator.
That's fair to all sides,
that judges and sees both sides of the picture.
Those are the peacemakers.
Those who are meek are those who are pliable.
In other words, when the storms come, you bend with it,
so when the storms leave, you can go back up.
This is what Jesus was talking about.
He was not just talking about it, he was recruiting them.
If you were a meek person, you were sitting there,
and he said blessed at the meek, he had you.
He got you right away.
He said, this is what the Kingdom is about.
Lets talk about this kingdom.
This Kingdom isnt, as you started to say
very early in our conversation,
he did not consider it to be an external as you say.
No, this is all internal, but expressed externally.
Okay, lets talk about what that means.
Because most kingdoms are based on legislation.
This is based on the inner condition of the heart,
on the emotions that get deep into man.
If you strictly go, like the law,
the law said,
shes an adulteress, stone her to death.
Jesus went behind the law.
No, no, this is a human being.
This human being made a mistake.
I tried to prevent her by saying dont do it again
so youre not brought into a problem.
What he did is go behind the law
and said no.
Because the law said, thats legislation.
It was a religious legislation, definitely religious.
But still legislation, and she should be stoned to death,
but he went beyond it and said no,
this is a human being, she has a right to live,
she made a mistake, she needs to live.
The kingdom...
The kingdom is, you see the difference between a legislation
and a coming from here, from the heart.
It seems that it is more of an integration
of your spiritual world into the heart,
and then expressing that through your own life.
Right.
So you hold that authority within you,
the understandings and authority within you, right?
Absolutely.
Thats what youre saying that Jesus message was
is that you carry this within you.
It's not an external.
I call it the latent forces
that are in every human heart,
even those who have gone astray,
those forces are still there,
its just that certain conditions
brought them into that other sphere.
Into doing evil, or something like that.
But the latent forces of love, meakness,
peacemaking, joy, harmony,
its in every human being.
When you listen to the messages of today,
for example, at this conference we're attending
here in Sedona,
this is the central theme of the times.
Everyone has the message.
People have different ideas of the path
and how you go there,
but the bottom line is this is the message of the time.
We have to recover that kingdom of deep love,
and spirituality, generosity,
non judgement within ourselves,
if were going to recover the larger human condition.
Thats the only way were going to recover.
We will never have peace, I'll guarantee you,
no government on this earth, including our own,
and I love our United States,
but no government is gonna bring peace to the world.
It takes you and me and rest of the people
to bring peace to the world.
Just like, Im in the State of Georgia,
you have bigotry, hatred, prejudice,
and weve got a lot of churches there.
But they havent solved the problem of bigotry,
hated, and prejudice
against any people of another faith
or of another color,
or of another form of thinking.
This is what the church came to do,
to bring heaven on earth.
Thats what Jesus came to do,
bring heaven on earth.
Instead the church represents
the same thing the rest of the world represents.
Competition.
How I can get ahead.
What must I do to step higher,
and that may meaning stepping on you.
You know what I mean?
Weve lost it.
The church is supposed to represent that.
Instead, they have a hierarchy
just like all the other systems do.
Jesus did not have a hierarchy.
Even though he chose twelve,
because the community was gathering around them.
But they werent vying for leadership.
They werent vying,
if you read the book of Acts,
they werent vying for leadership.
One time its Peter, one time its James.
In fact, James, the brother of Jesus, who despised him,
before he was crucified, became the head of the church.
Im talking about James the half brother of Jesus.
He became the head of the church.
He wasnt even one of the twelve,
but he became the head.
If these men were vying for leaderships
and for hey, Im the head man here, Im the honcho
When you're talking about,
as you call it, churchiosity,
really it was more Pauls message that went forward.
It was a misunderstanding of Paul.
Yeah.
I didnt have much time to go into that yesterday.
But we misunderstand even the writings of the Apostles Paul.
Some things he did not have clear
because he never sat under Jesus
and that was a thorn in his side,
or a thorn in his flesh, as he put it.
He was not a sickly man, as people teach,
because he says I have a thorn in the flesh and he was sick,
no, no, no, no, no.
Thorn in the flesh means,
I never sat under Jesus,
so I got that constant criticism against me all the time.
Because he didnt learn with him?
Whereas the others were.
He was going out to the Gentiles,
to Syrians,
and some Greeks were coming in,
and some Roman people,
but not that many.
It was more other Semitic people that were in that area.
In summary,
what is the core message?
I think weve covered it, but still,
if you can articulate it
or choose to another way,
that you really trying to do
through your work and helping people understand the essence
of what you understand from the Aramaic writings.
Like I said in the beginning
coming from Aramaic, it helps clarify
a better picture of God.
Understanding is what I really mean,
an understanding of God, what God is,
not a supernatural being.
God is not a supernatural being,
God is part of what all of us are,
our spirits, our hearts,
this is what God is.
Understanding other human beings,
and following it so I can get along with you peaceably.
Its strange, it's in us.
I use an illustration,
I dont know how much time I have,
but I use an illustration,
I say its the funny thing about us,
if were walking along the beach and someone is drowning,
and we hear them cry for help,
you will run in there.
If you cant swim to save them,
youll get someone to do it.
You dont stop and ask,
are you saved, brother?
Or, whats the color of your skin? Or
Which denomination are you?
What denomination are you?
Or anything, what is your political standing?
Thats all gone.
Why? Why?
Because life calls to life.
And all of a sudden, all boundaries are crossed,
transcended.
Life calls to life,
so you go in there and rescue them.
You get them out of the water,
then you get the water out of them.
Stand them up, straighten them out,
then you fight.
(laughter)
I use that as an illustration.
But its like what Martin Luther King Jr. said,
our loyalties must,
must transcend our faith,
our race,
our thinking,
our loyalties must transcend it
when it comes to another human being.
Otherwise, well never have peace.
Well never get a world perspective
until our loyalties transcend it.
We cant literally transcend our race,
but our loyalties can.
You see, thats the difference.
Religion and everything else,
now youve found God.
Because God is universal,
and the human family is universal.
On that, thank you so much, Rocco.
I love your passion, I love your heart.
Its a beautiful and necessary message.
Thank you.
For a deeper understanding of Roccos work,
and to check into his many books,
you can go to his website at noohra,
N-O-O-H-R-A dot com.
As an aside, after the interview,
I told him I was sorry I hadnt taken the time
to ask about the word hell.
He said in fact, that hell actually means regret.
A life filled with regrets is the translation of hell.
No devil, pitchfork, no Phoenix plus temperatures,
just thought youd like to know.
Until next time, thanks for watching CMN.
(calm music)